The Brothers Karamazov

Translated from the Russian of

Fyodor Dostoyevsky

by Constance Garnett

The Lowell Press

New York

PART I

Book I. The History Of A Family

It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at the request of,
and in the interests of, his elder brother, Dmitri, whom he saw for the first
time on this very visit, though he had before leaving Moscow been in
correspondence with him about an important matter of more concern to Dmitri
than himself. What that business was the reader will learn fully in due time.
Yet even when I did know of this special circumstance I still felt Ivan
Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure, and thought his visit rather
mysterious.

I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a mediator between his
father and his elder brother Dmitri, who was in open quarrel with his father
and even planning to bring an action against him.

The family, I repeat, was now united for the first time, and some of its
members met for the first time in their lives. The younger brother, Alexey, had
been a year already among us, having been the first of the three to arrive. It
is of that brother Alexey I find it most difficult to speak in this
introduction. Yet I must give some preliminary account of him, if only to
explain one queer fact, which is that I have to introduce my hero to the reader
wearing the cassock of a novice. Yes, he had been for the last year in our
monastery, and seemed willing to be cloistered there for the rest of his life.

“But there are no hooks there,” said Alyosha, looking gently and
seriously at his father.

“Yes, yes, only the shadows of hooks, I know, I know. That’s how a
Frenchman described hell: ‘ J’ai vu l’ombre d’un
cocher qui avec l’ombre d’une brosse frottait l’ombre
d’une carrosse. ’ How do you know there are no hooks, darling?
When you’ve lived with the monks you’ll sing a different tune. But
go and get at the truth there, and then come and tell me. Anyway it’s
easier going to the other world if one knows what there is there. Besides, it
will be more seemly for you with the monks than here with me, with a drunken
old man and young harlots ... though you’re like an angel, nothing
touches you. And I dare say nothing will touch you there. That’s why I
let you go, because I hope for that. You’ve got all your wits about you.
You will burn and you will burn out; you will be healed and come back again.
And I will wait for you. I feel that you’re the only creature in the
world who has not condemned me. My dear boy, I feel it, you know. I can’t
help feeling it.”

And he even began blubbering. He was sentimental. He was wicked and
sentimental.

Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit. Of all the
wrangling, quarrelsome party, Dmitri was the only one who could regard the
interview seriously. All the others would come from frivolous motives, perhaps
insulting to the elder. Alyosha was well aware of that. Ivan and Miüsov would
come from curiosity, perhaps of the coarsest kind, while his father might be
contemplating some piece of buffoonery. Though he said nothing, Alyosha
thoroughly understood his father. The boy, I repeat, was far from being so
simple as every one thought him. He awaited the day with a heavy heart. No
doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be
ended. But his chief anxiety concerned the elder. He trembled for him, for his
glory, and dreaded any affront to him, especially the refined, courteous irony
of Miüsov and the supercilious half‐utterances of the highly educated Ivan. He
even wanted to venture on warning the elder, telling him something about them,
but, on second thoughts, said nothing. He only sent word the day before,
through a friend, to his brother Dmitri, that he loved him and expected him to
keep his promise. Dmitri wondered, for he could not remember what he had
promised, but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let
himself be provoked “by vileness,” but that, although he had a deep
respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan, he was convinced that the
meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce.

“Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in
respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly,” he wrote in
conclusion. Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter.

Book II. An Unfortunate Gathering

“Fyodor Pavlovitch, I warn you I shall go back and leave you here.
They’ll turn you out when I’m gone.”

“But I’m not interfering with you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
Look,” he cried suddenly, stepping within the precincts, “what a
vale of roses they live in!”

Though there were no roses now, there were numbers of rare and beautiful autumn
flowers growing wherever there was space for them, and evidently tended by a
skillful hand; there were flower‐beds round the church, and between the tombs;
and the one‐storied wooden house where the elder lived was also surrounded with
flowers.

“And was it like this in the time of the last elder, Varsonofy? He
didn’t care for such elegance. They say he used to jump up and thrash
even ladies with a stick,” observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, as he went up the
steps.

“The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange, but a great deal
that’s told is foolishness. He never thrashed any one,” answered
the monk. “Now, gentlemen, if you will wait a minute I will announce
you.”

“Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the last time, your compact, do you hear? Behave
properly or I will pay you out!” Miüsov had time to mutter again.

“I can’t think why you are so agitated,” Fyodor Pavlovitch
observed sarcastically. “Are you uneasy about your sins? They say he can
tell by one’s eyes what one has come about. And what a lot you think of
their opinion! you, a Parisian, and so advanced. I’m surprised at
you.”

But Miüsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm. They were asked to come in. He
walked in, somewhat irritated.

“Now, I know myself, I am annoyed, I shall lose my temper and begin to
quarrel—and lower myself and my ideas,” he reflected.

The elder suddenly rose from his seat. “Excuse me, gentlemen, for leaving
you a few minutes,” he said, addressing all his guests. “I have
visitors awaiting me who arrived before you. But don’t you tell lies all
the same,” he added, turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good‐humored
face. He went out of the cell. Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down
the steps. Alyosha was breathless: he was glad to get away, but he was glad,
too, that the elder was good‐humored and not offended. Father Zossima was going
towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there. But Fyodor
Pavlovitch persisted in stopping him at the door of the cell.

“Blessed man!” he cried, with feeling. “Allow me to kiss your
hand once more. Yes, with you I could still talk, I could still get on. Do you
think I always lie and play the fool like this? Believe me, I have been acting
like this all the time on purpose to try you. I have been testing you all the
time to see whether I could get on with you. Is there room for my humility
beside your pride? I am ready to give you a testimonial that one can get on
with you! But now, I’ll be quiet; I will keep quiet all the time.
I’ll sit in a chair and hold my tongue. Now it is for you to speak, Pyotr
Alexandrovitch. You are the principal person left now—for ten
minutes.”

He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny baby in
her arms.

“From Vyshegorye, dear Father.”

“Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby. What do you
want?”

“I’ve come to look at you. I have been to you before—or have
you forgotten? You’ve no great memory if you’ve forgotten me. They
told us you were ill. Thinks I, I’ll go and see him for myself. Now I see
you, and you’re not ill! You’ll live another twenty years. God
bless you! There are plenty to pray for you; how should you be ill?”

“I thank you for all, daughter.”

“By the way, I have a thing to ask, not a great one. Here are sixty
copecks. Give them, dear Father, to some one poorer than me. I thought as I
came along, better give through him. He’ll know whom to give to.”

“Thanks, my dear, thanks! You are a good woman. I love you. I will do so
certainly. Is that your little girl?”

“My little girl, Father, Lizaveta.”

“May the Lord bless you both, you and your babe Lizaveta! You have
gladdened my heart, mother. Farewell, dear children, farewell, dear
ones.”

He blessed them all and bowed low to them.

And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible,
prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder listened to her with a smile,
and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her
eyes and began crying.

“Don’t be angry with me. I’m silly and good for nothing ...
and perhaps Alyosha’s right, quite right, in not wanting to come and see
such a ridiculous girl.”

“I will certainly send him,” said the elder.

“You apply them to us, and look upon us as socialists?” Father
Païssy asked directly, without beating about the bush.

But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer, the door opened,
and the guest so long expected, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, came in. They had, in
fact, given up expecting him, and his sudden appearance caused some surprise
for a moment.

“Well, are you coming to the Superior?” Miüsov asked Ivan abruptly.

“Why not? I was especially invited yesterday.”

“Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded
dinner,” said Miüsov with the same irritability, regardless of the fact
that the monk was listening. “We ought, at least, to apologize for the
disturbance, and explain that it was not our doing. What do you think?”

“Yes, we must explain that it wasn’t our doing. Besides, father
won’t be there,” observed Ivan.

“Well, I should hope not! Confound this dinner!”

They all walked on, however. The monk listened in silence. On the road through
the copse he made one observation however—that the Father Superior had
been waiting a long time, and that they were more than half an hour late. He
received no answer. Miüsov looked with hatred at Ivan.

“Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,”
he thought. “A brazen face, and the conscience of a Karamazov!”

“I may have reasons of my own for visiting her. That’s not your
business. But as for relationship, your brother, or even your father, is more
likely to make her yours than mine. Well, here we are. You’d better go to
the kitchen. Hullo! what’s wrong, what is it? Are we late? They
can’t have finished dinner so soon! Have the Karamazovs been making
trouble again? No doubt they have. Here’s your father and your brother
Ivan after him. They’ve broken out from the Father Superior’s. And
look, Father Isidor’s shouting out something after them from the steps.
And your father’s shouting and waving his arms. I expect he’s
swearing. Bah, and there goes Miüsov driving away in his carriage. You see,
he’s going. And there’s old Maximov running!—there must have
been a row. There can’t have been any dinner. Surely they’ve not
been beating the Father Superior! Or have they, perhaps, been beaten? It would
serve them right!”

There was reason for Rakitin’s exclamations. There had been a scandalous,
an unprecedented scene. It had all come from the impulse of a moment.

But the carriage had already driven away. Ivan made no reply.

“Well, you are a fellow,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said again.

After a pause of two minutes, looking askance at his son, “Why, it was
you got up all this monastery business. You urged it, you approved of it. Why
are you angry now?”

“You’ve talked rot enough. You might rest a bit now,” Ivan
snapped sullenly.

Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes.

“A drop of brandy would be nice now,” he observed sententiously,
but Ivan made no response.

“You shall have some, too, when we get home.”

Ivan was still silent.

Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes.

“But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery, though you will
dislike it so much, most honored Karl von Moor.”

Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and turning away stared at the
road. And they did not speak again all the way home.

Book III. The Sensualists

He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism. And the birth of his deformed child,
and its death, had, as though by special design, been accompanied by another
strange and marvelous event, which, as he said later, had left a
“stamp” upon his soul. It happened that, on the very night after
the burial of his child, Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new‐born baby. She
was frightened and waked her husband. He listened and said he thought it was
more like some one groaning, “it might be a woman.” He got up and
dressed. It was a rather warm night in May. As he went down the steps, he
distinctly heard groans coming from the garden. But the gate from the yard into
the garden was locked at night, and there was no other way of entering it, for
it was enclosed all round by a strong, high fence. Going back into the house,
Grigory lighted a lantern, took the garden key, and taking no notice of the
hysterical fears of his wife, who was still persuaded that she heard a child
crying, and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her, went into the
garden in silence. There he heard at once that the groans came from the
bath‐house that stood near the garden gate, and that they were the groans of a
woman. Opening the door of the bath‐house, he saw a sight which petrified him.
An idiot girl, who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town
by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya (Stinking Lizaveta), had got into
the bath‐ house and had just given birth to a child. She lay dying with the
baby beside her. She said nothing, for she had never been able to speak. But
her story needs a chapter to itself.

Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta, while he ran to fetch an old
midwife who lived close by. They saved the baby, but Lizaveta died at dawn.
Grigory took the baby, brought it home, and making his wife sit down, put it on
her lap. “A child of God—an orphan is akin to all,” he said,
“and to us above others. Our little lost one has sent us this, who has
come from the devil’s son and a holy innocent. Nurse him and weep no
more.”

So Marfa brought up the child. He was christened Pavel, to which people were
not slow in adding Fyodorovitch (son of Fyodor). Fyodor Pavlovitch did not
object to any of this, and thought it amusing, though he persisted vigorously
in denying his responsibility. The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the
foundling. Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child,
calling him Smerdyakov, after his mother’s nickname.

So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch’s second servant, and was
living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins. He was
employed as cook. I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov, but I am ashamed
of keeping my readers’ attention so long occupied with these common
menials, and I will go back to my story, hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in
the course of it.

“ ‘Four thousand! What do you mean? I was joking. You’ve been
counting your chickens too easily, madam. Two hundred, if you like, with all my
heart. But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity.
You’ve put yourself out to no purpose.’

“I should have lost the game, of course. She’d have run away. But
it would have been an infernal revenge. It would have been worth it all.
I’d have howled with regret all the rest of my life, only to have played
that trick. Would you believe it, it has never happened to me with any other
woman, not one, to look at her at such a moment with hatred. But, on my oath, I
looked at her for three seconds, or five perhaps, with fearful
hatred—that hate which is only a hair’s‐breadth from love, from the
maddest love!

“I went to the window, put my forehead against the frozen pane, and I
remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire. I did not keep her long,
don’t be afraid. I turned round, went up to the table, opened the drawer
and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles (it was lying in a French
dictionary). Then I showed it her in silence, folded it, handed it to her,
opened the door into the passage, and, stepping back, made her a deep bow, a
most respectful, a most impressive bow, believe me! She shuddered all over,
gazed at me for a second, turned horribly pale—white as a sheet, in
fact—and all at once, not impetuously but softly, gently, bowed down to
my feet—not a boarding‐school curtsey, but a Russian bow, with her
forehead to the floor. She jumped up and ran away. I was wearing my sword. I
drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot; why, I don’t know.
It would have been frightfully stupid, of course. I suppose it was from
delight. Can you understand that one might kill oneself from delight? But I
didn’t stab myself. I only kissed my sword and put it back in the
scabbard—which there was no need to have told you, by the way. And I
fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on rather
thick to glorify myself. But let it pass, and to hell with all who pry into the
human heart! Well, so much for that ‘adventure’ with Katerina
Ivanovna. So now Ivan knows of it, and you—no one else.”

Dmitri got up, took a step or two in his excitement, pulled out his
handkerchief and mopped his forehead, then sat down again, not in the same
place as before, but on the opposite side, so that Alyosha had to turn quite
round to face him.

“Grushenka? I shall see her. I shall rush out and prevent it.”

“And if—”

“If there’s an if, it will be murder. I couldn’t endure
it.”

“Who will be murdered?”

“The old man. I shan’t kill her.”

“Brother, what are you saying?”

“Oh, I don’t know.... I don’t know. Perhaps I shan’t
kill, and perhaps I shall. I’m afraid that he will suddenly become so
loathsome to me with his face at that moment. I hate his ugly throat, his nose,
his eyes, his shameless snigger. I feel a physical repulsion. That’s what
I’m afraid of. That’s what may be too much for me.”

“I’ll go, Mitya. I believe that God will order things for the best,
that nothing awful may happen.”

“And I will sit and wait for the miracle. And if it doesn’t come to
pass—”

Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father’s house.

“I warned you,” said the elder of her aunts. “I tried to
prevent your doing this. You’re too impulsive. How could you do such a
thing? You don’t know these creatures, and they say she’s worse
than any of them. You are too self‐willed.”

“She’s a tigress!” yelled Katerina Ivanovna. “Why did
you hold me, Alexey Fyodorovitch? I’d have beaten her—beaten
her!”

She could not control herself before Alyosha; perhaps she did not care to,
indeed.

“She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold!”

Alyosha withdrew towards the door.

“But, my God!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, clasping her hands.
“He! He! He could be so dishonorable, so inhuman! Why, he told that
creature what happened on that fatal, accursed day! ‘You brought your
beauty for sale, dear young lady.’ She knows it! Your brother’s a
scoundrel, Alexey Fyodorovitch.”

Alyosha wanted to say something, but he couldn’t find a word. His heart
ached.

“Go away, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It’s shameful, it’s awful for
me! To‐ morrow, I beg you on my knees, come to‐morrow. Don’t condemn me.
Forgive me. I don’t know what I shall do with myself now!”

Alyosha walked out into the street reeling. He could have wept as she did.
Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid.

“The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov;
it’s been left with us since dinner‐time.”

Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it, almost
unconsciously, into his pocket.

PART II

Book IV. Lacerations

With these words Father Païssy blessed him. As Alyosha left the monastery and
thought them over, he suddenly realized that he had met a new and unexpected
friend, a warmly loving teacher, in this austere monk who had hitherto treated
him sternly. It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his
death, and “perhaps that’s just what had passed between
them,” Alyosha thought suddenly. The philosophic reflections he had just
heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Païssy’s heart.
He was in haste to arm the boy’s mind for conflict with temptation and to
guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defense he could
imagine.

“Ah, mamma, how sweetly you talk! I must kiss you for it, mamma.”

“And I kiss you too, Lise. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” Madame
Hohlakov began mysteriously and importantly, speaking in a rapid whisper.
“I don’t want to suggest anything, I don’t want to lift the
veil, you will see for yourself what’s going on. It’s appalling.
It’s the most fantastic farce. She loves your brother, Ivan, and she is
doing her utmost to persuade herself she loves your brother, Dmitri. It’s
appalling! I’ll go in with you, and if they don’t turn me out,
I’ll stay to the end.”

“For an awful piece of stupidity, Lise! Good‐by!”

“Don’t dare to go away like that!” Lise was beginning.

“Lise, I have a real sorrow! I’ll be back directly, but I have a
great, great sorrow!”

And he ran out of the room.

“I see and hear,” muttered Alyosha.

“Father, father, how can you—with him! Let him alone!” cried
the boy, sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes.

“Do give over fooling, showing off your silly antics which never lead to
anything!” shouted Varvara, stamping her foot with passion.

“Your anger is quite just this time, Varvara, and I’ll make haste
to satisfy you. Come, put on your cap, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and I’ll put
on mine. We will go out. I have a word to say to you in earnest, but not within
these walls. This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina; I forgot to introduce
her to you. She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us
mortals,... if you can understand.”

“There he is shaking all over, as though he is in convulsions!”
Varvara went on indignantly.

“And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now,
she is a heavenly angel incarnate too, and she has good reason to call me so.
Come along, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we must make an end.”

And, snatching Alyosha’s hand, he drew him out of the room into the
street.

Book V. Pro And Contra

“No, I won’t show it to you. Even if she sanctioned it, I
wouldn’t. I am coming to‐morrow, and if you like, we can talk over many
things, but now good‐by!”

And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street.

“Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to‐day?” repeated
Alyosha quickly.

“That’s so.”

“The Metropolis tavern in the market‐place?”

“The very same.”

“That’s quite likely,” cried Alyosha, much excited.
“Thank you, Smerdyakov; that’s important. I’ll go there at
once.”

“Don’t betray me,” Smerdyakov called after him.

“Oh, no, I’ll go to the tavern as though by chance. Don’t be
anxious.”

“But wait a minute, I’ll open the gate to you,” cried Marya
Kondratyevna.

“No; it’s a short cut, I’ll get over the fence again.”

What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation. He ran to the tavern. It
was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic dress, but he
could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them down. But just as
he reached the tavern, a window was flung open, and his brother Ivan called
down to him from it.

“Alyosha, can’t you come up here to me? I shall be awfully
grateful.”

“To be sure I can, only I don’t quite know whether in this
dress—”

“But I am in a room apart. Come up the steps; I’ll run down to meet
you.”

A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother. Ivan was alone dining.

Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling.

“And why did you begin ‘as stupidly as you could’?”
asked Alyosha, looking dreamily at him.

“To begin with, for the sake of being Russian. Russian conversations on
such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly. And secondly, the
stupider one is, the closer one is to reality. The stupider one is, the clearer
one is. Stupidity is brief and artless, while intelligence wriggles and hides
itself. Intelligence is a knave, but stupidity is honest and straightforward.
I’ve led the conversation to my despair, and the more stupidly I have
presented it, the better for me.”

“You will explain why you don’t accept the world?” said
Alyosha.

“To be sure I will, it’s not a secret, that’s what I’ve
been leading up to. Dear little brother, I don’t want to corrupt you or
to turn you from your stronghold, perhaps I want to be healed by you.”
Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child. Alyosha had never seen
such a smile on his face before.

“I am all attention,” said Alyosha.

“My poem is called ‘The Grand Inquisitor’; it’s a
ridiculous thing, but I want to tell it to you.”

Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back. It was just as
Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before, though the parting had been very
different. The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through
Alyosha’s mind in the distress and dejection of that moment. He waited a
little, looking after his brother. He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he
walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left. He had never
noticed it before. But all at once he turned too, and almost ran to the
monastery. It was nearly dark, and he felt almost frightened; something new was
growing up in him for which he could not account. The wind had risen again as
on the previous evening, and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when
he entered the hermitage copse. He almost ran. “Pater Seraphicus—he
got that name from somewhere—where from?” Alyosha wondered.
“Ivan, poor Ivan, and when shall I see you again?... Here is the
hermitage. Yes, yes, that he is, Pater Seraphicus, he will save me—from
him and for ever!”

Several times afterwards he wondered how he could on leaving Ivan so completely
forget his brother Dmitri, though he had that morning, only a few hours before,
so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so, even should he be
unable to return to the monastery that night.

“Haven’t you something more to say—something to add?”
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan.

“And couldn’t I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too—in case
anything happened?” Ivan shouted suddenly, for some unknown reason
raising his voice.

“From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent for,” Smerdyakov
muttered, almost in a whisper, looking disconcerted, but gazing intently into
Ivan’s eyes.

“Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer. Is it to save my
spending money on the fare, or to save my going so far out of my way, that you
insist on Tchermashnya?”

“Precisely so ...” muttered Smerdyakov, with a breaking voice. He
looked at Ivan with a revolting smile, and again made ready to draw back. But
to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh, and went through the gate still
laughing. Any one who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he
was not laughing from lightness of heart, and he could not have explained
himself what he was feeling at that instant. He moved and walked as though in a
nervous frenzy.

Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that
day. Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner, and the soup, compared with
Smerdyakov’s, was “no better than dish‐water,” and the fowl
was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it. To her master’s
bitter, though deserved, reproaches, Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was
a very old one to begin with, and that she had never been trained as a cook. In
the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch; he was
informed that Grigory, who had not been well for the last three days, was
completely laid up by his lumbago. Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early
as possible and locked himself up alone in the house. He was in terrible
excitement and suspense. That evening he reckoned on Grushenka’s coming
almost as a certainty. He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an
assurance “that she had promised to come without fail.” The
incorrigible old man’s heart throbbed with excitement; he paced up and
down his empty rooms listening. He had to be on the alert. Dmitri might be on
the watch for her somewhere, and when she knocked on the window (Smerdyakov had
informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock) the
door must be opened at once. She must not be a second in the passage, for
fear—which God forbid!—that she should be frightened and run away.
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of, but never had his heart been steeped in
such voluptuous hopes. This time he could say almost certainly that she would
come!

Book VI. The Russian Monk

The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the
monastery. The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was from
their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient ritual, and
all the monks gathered together in the church. And before dawn the news of the
death reached the town. By the morning all the town was talking of the event,
and crowds were flocking from the town to the monastery. But this subject will
be treated in the next book; I will only add here that before a day had passed
something happened so unexpected, so strange, upsetting, and bewildering in its
effect on the monks and the townspeople, that after all these years, that day
of general suspense is still vividly remembered in the town.

PART III

Book VII. Alyosha

At that moment Alyosha passed him, hurrying away, but not in the direction of
the church. Their eyes met. Alyosha quickly turned away his eyes and dropped
them to the ground, and from the boy’s look alone, Father Païssy guessed
what a great change was taking place in him at that moment.

“Have you, too, fallen into temptation?” cried Father Païssy.
“Can you be with those of little faith?” he added mournfully.

Alyosha stood still and gazed vaguely at Father Païssy, but quickly turned his
eyes away again and again looked on the ground. He stood sideways and did not
turn his face to Father Païssy, who watched him attentively.

“Where are you hastening? The bell calls to service,” he asked
again, but again Alyosha gave no answer.

“Are you leaving the hermitage? What, without asking leave, without
asking a blessing?”

Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile, cast a strange, very strange, look at the
Father to whom his former guide, the former sovereign of his heart and mind,
his beloved elder, had confided him as he lay dying. And suddenly, still
without speaking, waved his hand, as though not caring even to be respectful,
and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from the hermitage.

“You will come back again!” murmured Father Païssy, looking after
him with sorrowful surprise.

“I don’t care ... where you like.”

“Let’s go to Grushenka, eh? Will you come?” pronounced
Rakitin at last, trembling with timid suspense.

“Let’s go to Grushenka,” Alyosha answered calmly, at once,
and this prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he
almost started back.

“Well! I say!” he cried in amazement, but seizing Alyosha firmly by
the arm he led him along the path, still dreading that he would change his
mind.

They walked along in silence, Rakitin was positively afraid to talk.

“And how glad she will be, how delighted!” he muttered, but lapsed
into silence again. And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking
Alyosha to her. He was a practical person and never undertook anything without
a prospect of gain for himself. His object in this case was twofold, first a
revengeful desire to see “the downfall of the righteous,” and
Alyosha’s fall “from the saints to the sinners,” over which
he was already gloating in his imagination, and in the second place he had in
view a certain material gain for himself, of which more will be said later.

“So the critical moment has come,” he thought to himself with
spiteful glee, “and we shall catch it on the hop, for it’s just
what we want.”

“He is a Pole, that officer of hers,” he began again, restraining
himself; “and indeed he is not an officer at all now. He served in the
customs in Siberia, somewhere on the Chinese frontier, some puny little beggar
of a Pole, I expect. Lost his job, they say. He’s heard now that
Grushenka’s saved a little money, so he’s turned up
again—that’s the explanation of the mystery.”

Again Alyosha seemed not to hear. Rakitin could not control himself.

“Well, so you’ve saved the sinner?” he laughed spitefully.
“Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path? Driven out the seven
devils, eh? So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come
to pass!”

“Hush, Rakitin,” Alyosha answered with an aching heart.

“So you despise me now for those twenty‐five roubles? I’ve sold my
friend, you think. But you are not Christ, you know, and I am not Judas.”

“Oh, Rakitin, I assure you I’d forgotten about it,” cried
Alyosha, “you remind me of it yourself....”

But this was the last straw for Rakitin.

“Damnation take you all and each of you!” he cried suddenly,
“why the devil did I take you up? I don’t want to know you from
this time forward. Go alone, there’s your road!”

And he turned abruptly into another street, leaving Alyosha alone in the dark.
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery.

What was he weeping over?

Oh! in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars, which were shining to
him from the abyss of space, and “he was not ashamed of that
ecstasy.” There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of
God, linking his soul to them, and it was trembling all over “in contact
with other worlds.” He longed to forgive every one and for everything,
and to beg forgiveness. Oh, not for himself, but for all men, for all and for
everything. “And others are praying for me too,” echoed again in
his soul. But with every instant he felt clearly and, as it were, tangibly,
that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his
soul. It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his
mind—and it was for all his life and for ever and ever. He had fallen on
the earth a weak boy, but he rose up a resolute champion, and he knew and felt
it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy. And never, never, all his life
long, could Alyosha forget that minute.

“Some one visited my soul in that hour,” he used to say afterwards,
with implicit faith in his words.

Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his
elder, who had bidden him “sojourn in the world.”

Book VIII. Mitya

“No need of thanks.”

“I’ll make haste and fly there. I’m afraid I’ve
overtaxed your strength. I shall never forget it. It’s a Russian says
that, Kuzma Kuzmitch, a R‐r‐ russian!”

“To be sure!”

Mitya seized his hand to press it, but there was a malignant gleam in the old
man’s eye. Mitya drew back his hand, but at once blamed himself for his
mistrustfulness.

“It’s because he’s tired,” he thought.

“For her sake! For her sake, Kuzma Kuzmitch! You understand that
it’s for her,” he cried, his voice ringing through the room. He
bowed, turned sharply round, and with the same long stride walked to the door
without looking back. He was trembling with delight.

“Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved
me,” was the thought in his mind. And if such a business man as Samsonov
(a most worthy old man, and what dignity!) had suggested this course, then ...
then success was assured. He would fly off immediately. “I will be back
before night, I shall be back at night and the thing is done. Could the old man
have been laughing at me?” exclaimed Mitya, as he strode towards his
lodging. He could, of course, imagine nothing, but that the advice was
practical “from such a business man” with an understanding of the
business, with an understanding of this Lyagavy (curious surname!).
Or—the old man was laughing at him.

Alas! The second alternative was the correct one. Long afterwards, when the
catastrophe had happened, old Samsonov himself confessed, laughing, that he had
made a fool of the “captain.” He was a cold, spiteful and sarcastic
man, liable to violent antipathies. Whether it was the
“captain’s” excited face, or the foolish conviction of the
“rake and spendthrift,” that he, Samsonov, could be taken in by
such a cock‐and‐bull story as his scheme, or his jealousy of Grushenka, in
whose name this “scapegrace” had rushed in on him with such a tale
to get money which worked on the old man, I can’t tell. But at the
instant when Mitya stood before him, feeling his legs grow weak under him, and
frantically exclaiming that he was ruined, at that moment the old man looked at
him with intense spite, and resolved to make a laughing‐stock of him. When
Mitya had gone, Kuzma Kuzmitch, white with rage, turned to his son and bade him
see to it that that beggar be never seen again, and never admitted even into
the yard, or else he’d—

He did not utter his threat. But even his son, who often saw him enraged,
trembled with fear. For a whole hour afterwards, the old man was shaking with
anger, and by evening he was worse, and sent for the doctor.

“Why, the man’s drunk, dead drunk, and he’ll go on drinking
now for a week; what’s the use of waiting here? And what if Samsonov sent
me here on purpose? What if she—? Oh, God, what have I done?”

The peasant sat watching him and grinning. Another time Mitya might have killed
the fool in a fury, but now he felt as weak as a child. He went quietly to the
bench, took up his overcoat, put it on without a word, and went out of the hut.
He did not find the forester in the next room; there was no one there. He took
fifty kopecks in small change out of his pocket and put them on the table for
his night’s lodging, the candle, and the trouble he had given. Coming out
of the hut he saw nothing but forest all round. He walked at hazard, not
knowing which way to turn out of the hut, to the right or to the left. Hurrying
there the evening before with the priest, he had not noticed the road. He had
no revengeful feeling for anybody, even for Samsonov, in his heart. He strode
along a narrow forest path, aimless, dazed, without heeding where he was going.
A child could have knocked him down, so weak was he in body and soul. He got
out of the forest somehow, however, and a vista of fields, bare after the
harvest, stretched as far as the eye could see.

“What despair! What death all round!” he repeated, striding on and
on.

He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven across country in
a hired trap. When he overtook him, Mitya asked the way, and it turned out that
the old merchant, too, was going to Volovya. After some discussion Mitya got
into the trap. Three hours later they arrived. At Volovya, Mitya at once
ordered posting‐horses to drive to the town, and suddenly realized that he was
appallingly hungry. While the horses were being harnessed, an omelette was
prepared for him. He ate it all in an instant, ate a huge hunk of bread, ate a
sausage, and swallowed three glasses of vodka. After eating, his spirits and
his heart grew lighter. He flew towards the town, urged on the driver, and
suddenly made a new and “unalterable” plan to procure that
“accursed money” before evening. “And to think, only to think
that a man’s life should be ruined for the sake of that paltry three
thousand!” he cried, contemptuously. “I’ll settle it to‐
day.” And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of what
might have happened to her, which never left him, he would perhaps have become
quite cheerful again.... But the thought of her was stabbing him to the heart
every moment, like a sharp knife.

At last they arrived, and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka.

“You’re lying!” shouted Mitya. “From your terror I know
where she is.”

He rushed away. Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily. But she
knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste, or she might not
have fared so well. But as he ran, he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by
an unexpected action. On the table stood a brass mortar, with a pestle in it, a
small brass pestle, not much more than six inches long. Mitya already had
opened the door with one hand when, with the other, he snatched up the pestle,
and thrust it in his side‐pocket.

“Oh, Lord! He’s going to murder some one!” cried Fenya,
flinging up her hands.

Immediately after he had left it that evening, Fenya had rushed to the chief
porter, Nazar Ivanovitch, and besought him, for Christ’s sake, “not
to let the captain in again to‐day or to‐morrow.” Nazar Ivanovitch
promised, but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him, and
meeting his nephew, a boy of twenty, who had recently come from the country, on
the way up told him to take his place, but forgot to mention “the
captain.” Mitya, running up to the gate, knocked. The lad instantly
recognized him, for Mitya had more than once tipped him. Opening the gate at
once, he let him in, and hastened to inform him with a good‐humored smile that
“Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now, you know.”

“Where is she then, Prohor?” asked Mitya, stopping short.

“She set off this evening, some two hours ago, with Timofey, to
Mokroe.”

“What for?” cried Mitya.

“That I can’t say. To see some officer. Some one invited her and
horses were sent to fetch her.”

Mitya left him, and ran like a madman to Fenya.

They began a third game, and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away. But by
the end of the third game, Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for billiards; he
laid down the cue, and without having supper as he had intended, he walked out
of the tavern. When he reached the market‐place he stood still in perplexity,
wondering at himself. He realized that what he wanted was to go to Fyodor
Pavlovitch’s and find out if anything had happened there. “On
account of some stupid nonsense—as it’s sure to turn out—am I
going to wake up the household and make a scandal? Fooh! damn it, is it my
business to look after them?”

In a very bad humor he went straight home, and suddenly remembered Fenya.
“Damn it all! I ought to have questioned her just now,” he thought
with vexation, “I should have heard everything.” And the desire to
speak to her, and so find out, became so pressing and importunate that when he
was half‐way home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where Grushenka
lodged. Going up to the gate he knocked. The sound of the knock in the silence
of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed. And no one answered him;
every one in the house was asleep.

“And I shall be making a fuss!” he thought, with a feeling of
positive discomfort. But instead of going away altogether, he fell to knocking
again with all his might, filling the street with clamor.

“Not coming? Well, I will knock them up, I will!” he muttered at
each knock, fuming at himself, but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on
the gate.

“Now, listen and remember. In an hour’s time the wine will arrive,
savories, pies, and sweets—bring them all up at once. That box Andrey has
got is to be brought up at once, too. Open it, and hand champagne immediately.
And the girls, we must have the girls, Marya especially.”

He turned to the cart and pulled out the box of pistols.

“Here, Andrey, let’s settle. Here’s fifteen roubles for the
drive, and fifty for vodka ... for your readiness, for your love.... Remember
Karamazov!”

“I’m afraid, sir,” faltered Andrey. “Give me five
roubles extra, but more I won’t take. Trifon Borissovitch, bear witness.
Forgive my foolish words ...”

“What are you afraid of?” asked Mitya, scanning him. “Well,
go to the devil, if that’s it!” he cried, flinging him five
roubles. “Now, Trifon Borissovitch, take me up quietly and let me first
get a look at them, so that they don’t see me. Where are they? In the
blue room?”

Trifon Borissovitch looked apprehensively at Mitya, but at once obediently did
his bidding. Leading him into the passage, he went himself into the first large
room, adjoining that in which the visitors were sitting, and took the light
away. Then he stealthily led Mitya in, and put him in a corner in the dark,
whence he could freely watch the company without being seen. But Mitya did not
look long, and, indeed, he could not see them, he saw her, his heart throbbed
violently, and all was dark before his eyes.

She was sitting sideways to the table in a low chair, and beside her, on the
sofa, was the pretty youth, Kalganov. She was holding his hand and seemed to be
laughing, while he, seeming vexed and not looking at her, was saying something
in a loud voice to Maximov, who sat the other side of the table, facing
Grushenka. Maximov was laughing violently at something. On the sofa sat he , and on a chair by the sofa there was another stranger. The one on
the sofa was lolling backwards, smoking a pipe, and Mitya had an impression of
a stoutish, broad‐faced, short little man, who was apparently angry about
something. His friend, the other stranger, struck Mitya as extraordinarily
tall, but he could make out nothing more. He caught his breath. He could not
bear it for a minute, he put the pistol‐ case on a chest, and with a throbbing
heart he walked, feeling cold all over, straight into the blue room to face the
company.

“Aie!” shrieked Grushenka, the first to notice him.

“Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?”

“My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said Trifon Borissovitch,
“make them give you back the money you lost. It’s as good as stolen
from you.”

“I don’t want my fifty roubles back,” Kalganov declared
suddenly.

“I don’t want my two hundred, either,” cried Mitya, “I
wouldn’t take it for anything! Let him keep it as a consolation.”

“Bravo, Mitya! You’re a trump, Mitya!” cried Grushenka, and
there was a note of fierce anger in the exclamation.

The little pan , crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity, was
making for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly, addressing
Grushenka:

“ Pani , if you want to come with me, come. If not, good‐by.”

And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door. This was a
man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after all that had
passed, he still expected that she would marry him. Mitya slammed the door
after him.

“Lock it,” said Kalganov. But the key clicked on the other side,
they had locked it from within.

“That’s capital!” exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly.
“Serve them right!”

“This is impossible!” cried the small young man. “Mihail
Makarovitch, Mihail Makarovitch, this won’t do!... I beg you’ll
allow me to speak. I should never have expected such behavior from
you....”

“This is delirium, gentlemen, raving delirium,” cried the captain
of police; “look at him: drunk, at this time of night, in the company of
a disreputable woman, with the blood of his father on his hands.... It’s
delirium!...”

“I beg you most earnestly, dear Mihail Makarovitch, to restrain your
feelings,” the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old police
captain, “or I shall be forced to resort to—”

But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish. He turned to Mitya, and
delivered himself in a loud, firm, dignified voice:

“Ex‐Lieutenant Karamazov, it is my duty to inform you that you are
charged with the murder of your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov,
perpetrated this night....”

He said something more, and the prosecutor, too, put in something, but though
Mitya heard them he did not understand them. He stared at them all with wild
eyes.

Book IX. The Preliminary Investigation

As for Madame Hohlakov, she was simply enchanted by the young man. “Such
sense! such exactness! in so young a man! in our day! and all that with such
manners and appearance! People say the young people of to‐day are no good for
anything, but here’s an example!” etc. So she simply forgot this
“dreadful affair,” and it was only as she was getting into bed,
that, suddenly recalling “how near death she had been,” she
exclaimed: “Ah, it is awful, awful!”

But she fell at once into a sound, sweet sleep.

I would not, however, have dwelt on such trivial and irrelevant details, if
this eccentric meeting of the young official with the by no means elderly widow
had not subsequently turned out to be the foundation of the whole career of
that practical and precise young man. His story is remembered to this day with
amazement in our town, and I shall perhaps have something to say about it, when
I have finished my long history of the Brothers Karamazov.

“Such violent and protracted epileptic fits, recurring continually for
twenty‐four hours, are rarely to be met with, and are of interest to
science,” he declared enthusiastically to his companions, and as they
left they laughingly congratulated him on his find. The prosecutor and the
investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor’s saying that
Smerdyakov could not outlive the night.

After these long, but I think necessary explanations, we will return to that
moment of our tale at which we broke off.

“Forgive me, gentlemen, oh, allow me, allow me!” he cried.
“You’ve the heart of an angel, an angel, Mihail Makarovitch, I
thank you for her. I will, I will be calm, cheerful, in fact. Tell her, in the
kindness of your heart, that I am cheerful, quite cheerful, that I shall be
laughing in a minute, knowing that she has a guardian angel like you. I shall
have done with all this directly, and as soon as I’m free, I’ll be
with her, she’ll see, let her wait. Gentlemen,” he said, turning to
the two lawyers, “now I’ll open my whole soul to you; I’ll
pour out everything. We’ll finish this off directly, finish it off gayly.
We shall laugh at it in the end, shan’t we? But, gentlemen, that woman is
the queen of my heart. Oh, let me tell you that. That one thing I’ll tell
you now.... I see I’m with honorable men. She is my light, she is my holy
one, and if only you knew! Did you hear her cry, ‘I’ll go to death
with you’? And what have I, a penniless beggar, done for her? Why such
love for me? How can a clumsy, ugly brute like me, with my ugly face, deserve
such love, that she is ready to go to exile with me? And how she fell down at
your feet for my sake, just now!... and yet she’s proud and has done
nothing! How can I help adoring her, how can I help crying out and rushing to
her as I did just now? Gentlemen, forgive me! But now, now I am
comforted.”

And he sank back in his chair and, covering his face with his hands, burst into
tears. But they were happy tears. He recovered himself instantly. The old
police captain seemed much pleased, and the lawyers also. They felt that the
examination was passing into a new phase. When the police captain went out,
Mitya was positively gay.

“Now, gentlemen, I am at your disposal, entirely at your disposal. And if
it were not for all these trivial details, we should understand one another in
a minute. I’m at those details again. I’m at your disposal,
gentlemen, but I declare that we must have mutual confidence, you in me and I
in you, or there’ll be no end to it. I speak in your interests. To
business, gentlemen, to business, and don’t rummage in my soul;
don’t tease me with trifles, but only ask me about facts and what
matters, and I will satisfy you at once. And damn the details!”

So spoke Mitya. The interrogation began again.

“It’s not a question of dreams now, gentlemen—this is
realism, this is real life! I’m a wolf and you’re the hunters.
Well, hunt him down!”

“You are wrong to make such comparisons ...” began Nikolay
Parfenovitch, with extraordinary softness.

“No, I’m not wrong, not at all!” Mitya flared up again,
though his outburst of wrath had obviously relieved his heart. He grew more
good‐ humored at every word. “You may not trust a criminal or a man on
trial tortured by your questions, but an honorable man, the honorable impulses
of the heart (I say that boldly!)—no! That you must believe you have no
right indeed ... but—

Be silent, heart, Be patient, humble, hold thy peace.

Well, shall I go on?” he broke off gloomily.

“If you’ll be so kind,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch.

“Let them assert it.”

“But you asserted it yourself.”

“Yes, I did, too.”

“We will compare all this with the evidence of other persons not yet
examined. Don’t be anxious about your money. It will be properly taken
care of and be at your disposal at the conclusion of ... what is beginning ...
if it appears, or, so to speak, is proved that you have undisputed right to it.
Well, and now....”

Nikolay Parfenovitch suddenly got up, and informed Mitya firmly that it was his
duty and obligation to conduct a minute and thorough search “of your
clothes and everything else....”

“By all means, gentlemen. I’ll turn out all my pockets, if you
like.”

And he did, in fact, begin turning out his pockets.

“It will be necessary to take off your clothes, too.”

“What! Undress? Ugh! Damn it! Won’t you search me as I am!
Can’t you?”

“It’s utterly impossible, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You must take off
your clothes.”

“As you like,” Mitya submitted gloomily; “only, please, not
here, but behind the curtains. Who will search them?”

“Behind the curtains, of course.”

Nikolay Parfenovitch bent his head in assent. His small face wore an expression
of peculiar solemnity.

“Come, you see,” the prosecutor went on with dignity, “and
you can judge for yourself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. On the one hand we have the
evidence of the open door from which you ran out, a fact which overwhelms you
and us. On the other side your incomprehensible, persistent, and, so to speak,
obdurate silence with regard to the source from which you obtained the money
which was so suddenly seen in your hands, when only three hours earlier, on
your own showing, you pledged your pistols for the sake of ten roubles! In view
of all these facts, judge for yourself. What are we to believe, and what can we
depend upon? And don’t accuse us of being ‘frigid, cynical,
scoffing people,’ who are incapable of believing in the generous impulses
of your heart.... Try to enter into our position ...”

Mitya was indescribably agitated. He turned pale.

“Very well!” he exclaimed suddenly. “I will tell you my
secret. I’ll tell you where I got the money!... I’ll reveal my
shame, that I may not have to blame myself or you hereafter.”

“And believe me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” put in Nikolay Parfenovitch,
in a voice of almost pathetic delight, “that every sincere and complete
confession on your part at this moment may, later on, have an immense influence
in your favor, and may, indeed, moreover—”

But the prosecutor gave him a slight shove under the table, and he checked
himself in time. Mitya, it is true, had not heard him.

They decided that if tea were ready downstairs (Mihail Makarovitch had, no
doubt, gone down to get some) they would have a glass and then “go on and
on,” putting off their proper breakfast until a more favorable
opportunity. Tea really was ready below, and was soon brought up. Mitya at
first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him, but
afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily. He looked
surprisingly exhausted. It might have been supposed from his Herculean strength
that one night of carousing, even accompanied by the most violent emotions,
could have had little effect on him. But he felt that he could hardly hold his
head up, and from time to time all the objects about him seemed heaving and
dancing before his eyes. “A little more and I shall begin raving,”
he said to himself.

“What! Where?” he exclaimed opening his eyes, and sitting up on the
chest, as though he had revived from a swoon, smiling brightly. Nikolay
Parfenovitch was standing over him, suggesting that he should hear the protocol
read aloud and sign it. Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an hour or more,
but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch. He was suddenly struck by the fact
that there was a pillow under his head, which hadn’t been there when he
had leant back, exhausted, on the chest.

“Who put that pillow under my head? Who was so kind?” he cried,
with a sort of ecstatic gratitude, and tears in his voice, as though some great
kindness had been shown him.

He never found out who this kind man was; perhaps one of the peasant witnesses,
or Nikolay Parfenovitch’s little secretary, had compassionately thought
to put a pillow under his head; but his whole soul was quivering with tears. He
went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they liked.

“I’ve had a good dream, gentlemen,” he said in a strange
voice, with a new light, as of joy, in his face.

“What are these people? What can men be after this?” he exclaimed
incoherently, in bitter despondency, almost despair. At that moment he had no
desire to live.

“Is it worth it? Is it worth it?” exclaimed the boy in his grief.

PART IV

Book X. The Boys

After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya’s
attitude to his mother. When Anna Fyodorovna (Madame Krassotkin) heard of her
son’s exploit, she almost went out of her mind with horror. She had such
terrible attacks of hysterics, lasting with intervals for several days, that
Kolya, seriously alarmed at last, promised on his honor that such pranks should
never be repeated. He swore on his knees before the holy image, and swore by
the memory of his father, at Madame Krassotkin’s instance, and the
“manly” Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six. And all that day
the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other’s arms
sobbing. Next day Kolya woke up as “unfeeling” as before, but he
had become more silent, more modest, sterner, and more thoughtful.

Six weeks later, it is true, he got into another scrape, which even brought his
name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace, but it was a scrape of quite
another kind, amusing, foolish, and he did not, as it turned out, take the
leading part in it, but was only implicated in it. But of this later. His
mother still fretted and trembled, but the more uneasy she became, the greater
were the hopes of Dardanelov. It must be noted that Kolya understood and
divined what was in Dardanelov’s heart and, of course, despised him
profoundly for his “feelings”; he had in the past been so tactless
as to show this contempt before his mother, hinting vaguely that he knew what
Dardanelov was after. But from the time of the railway incident his behavior in
this respect also was changed; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion
to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his
mother, which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude.
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya’s
presence, she would flush as pink as a rose. At such moments Kolya would either
stare out of the window scowling, or would investigate the state of his boots,
or would shout angrily for “Perezvon,” the big, shaggy, mangy dog,
which he had picked up a month before, brought home, and kept for some reason
secretly indoors, not showing him to any of his schoolfellows. He bullied him
frightfully, teaching him all sorts of tricks, so that the poor dog howled for
him whenever he was absent at school, and when he came in, whined with delight,
rushed about as if he were crazy, begged, lay down on the ground pretending to
be dead, and so on; in fact, showed all the tricks he had taught him, not at
the word of command, but simply from the zeal of his excited and grateful
heart.

I have forgotten, by the way, to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy
stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of
Captain Snegiryov. Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys
jeered at him, shouting the nickname “wisp of tow.”

“Brat?”

“Yes, a brat. What is it to you if I’m late; if I’m late, you
may be sure I have good reason,” muttered Agafya, busying herself about
the stove, without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice. She seemed
quite pleased, in fact, to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master.

“Listen, you frivolous young woman,” Krassotkin began, getting up
from the sofa, “can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and
something else besides, that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my
absence? I am going out.”

“And what am I going to swear for?” laughed Agafya. “I shall
look after them without that.”

“No, you must swear on your eternal salvation. Else I shan’t
go.”

“Well, don’t then. What does it matter to me? It’s cold out;
stay at home.”

“Kids,” Kolya turned to the children, “this woman will stay
with you till I come back or till your mother comes, for she ought to have been
back long ago. She will give you some lunch, too. You’ll give them
something, Agafya, won’t you?”

“That I can do.”

“Good‐by, chickens, I go with my heart at rest. And you, granny,”
he added gravely, in an undertone, as he passed Agafya, “I hope
you’ll spare their tender years and not tell them any of your old
woman’s nonsense about Katerina. Ici , Perezvon!”

“Get along with you!” retorted Agafya, really angry this time.
“Ridiculous boy! You want a whipping for saying such things, that’s
what you want!”

“And if I am?” laughed Kolya.

“Well, a joke’s a joke. Laugh away. I don’t mind.
There’s no harm in a joke.”

“I beg your pardon, brother, it was a joke.”

“Well, God forgive you!”

“Do you forgive me, too?”

“I quite forgive you. Go along.”

“I say, you seem a clever peasant.”

“Cleverer than you,” the peasant answered unexpectedly, with the
same gravity.

“I doubt it,” said Kolya, somewhat taken aback.

“It’s true, though.”

“Perhaps it is.”

“It is, brother.”

“Good‐by, peasant!”

“Good‐by!”

“There are all sorts of peasants,” Kolya observed to Smurov after a
brief silence. “How could I tell I had hit on a clever one? I am always
ready to recognize intelligence in the peasantry.”

In the distance the cathedral clock struck half‐past eleven. The boys made
haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov’s lodging, a
considerable distance, quickly and almost in silence. Twenty paces from the
house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come
out to him.

“One must sniff round a bit first,” he observed to Smurov.

“Why ask him to come out?” Smurov protested. “You go in; they
will be awfully glad to see you. What’s the sense of making friends in
the frost out here?”

“I know why I want to see him out here in the frost,” Kolya cut him
short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with “small
boys,” and Smurov ran to do his bidding.

“The doctor has come!” cried Nina, who had been silent till then.

A carriage belonging to Madame Hohlakov drove up to the gate. The captain, who
had been expecting the doctor all the morning, rushed headlong out to meet him.
“Mamma” pulled herself together and assumed a dignified air.
Alyosha went up to Ilusha and began setting his pillows straight. Nina, from
her invalid chair, anxiously watched him putting the bed tidy. The boys
hurriedly took leave. Some of them promised to come again in the evening. Kolya
called Perezvon and the dog jumped off the bed.

“I won’t go away, I won’t go away,” Kolya said hastily
to Ilusha. “I’ll wait in the passage and come back when the
doctor’s gone, I’ll come back with Perezvon.”

But by now the doctor had entered, an important‐looking person with long, dark
whiskers and a shiny, shaven chin, wearing a bearskin coat. As he crossed the
threshold he stopped, taken aback; he probably fancied he had come to the wrong
place. “How is this? Where am I?” he muttered, not removing his
coat nor his peaked sealskin cap. The crowd, the poverty of the room, the
washing hanging on a line in the corner, puzzled him. The captain, bent double,
was bowing low before him.

“It’s here, sir, here, sir,” he muttered cringingly;
“it’s here, you’ve come right, you were coming to
us...”

“Sne‐gi‐ryov?” the doctor said loudly and pompously. “Mr.
Snegiryov—is that you?”

“That’s me, sir!”

“Ah!”

The doctor looked round the room with a squeamish air once more and threw off
his coat, displaying to all eyes the grand decoration at his neck. The captain
caught the fur coat in the air, and the doctor took off his cap.

“Where is the patient?” he asked emphatically.

“Just so, hurrah! You are a prophet. Oh, we shall get on together,
Karamazov! Do you know, what delights me most, is that you treat me quite like
an equal. But we are not equals, no, we are not, you are better! But we shall
get on. Do you know, all this last month, I’ve been saying to myself,
‘Either we shall be friends at once, for ever, or we shall part enemies
to the grave!’ ”

“And saying that, of course, you loved me,” Alyosha laughed gayly.

“I did. I loved you awfully. I’ve been loving and dreaming of you.
And how do you know it all beforehand? Ah, here’s the doctor. Goodness!
What will he tell us? Look at his face!”

Kolya ran out into the street.

“Good‐by, Karamazov? Will you come yourself?” he cried sharply and
angrily to Alyosha.

“I will certainly come in the evening.”

“What was that he said about Jerusalem?... What did he mean by
that?”

“It’s from the Bible. ‘If I forget thee, Jerusalem,’
that is, if I forget all that is most precious to me, if I let anything take
its place, then may—”

“I understand, that’s enough! Mind you come! Ici ,
Perezvon!” he cried with positive ferocity to the dog, and with rapid
strides he went home.

Book XI. Ivan

And again she cried bitterly.

“This I can tell you for certain, Grushenka,” Alyosha said, getting
up. “First, that he loves you, loves you more than any one in the world,
and you only, believe me. I know. I do know. The second thing is that I
don’t want to worm his secret out of him, but if he’ll tell me of
himself to‐ day, I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell
you. Then I’ll come to you to‐day, and tell you. Only ... I fancy ...
Katerina Ivanovna has nothing to do with it, and that the secret is about
something else. That’s certain. It isn’t likely it’s about
Katerina Ivanovna, it seems to me. Good‐by for now.”

Alyosha shook hands with her. Grushenka was still crying. He saw that she put
little faith in his consolation, but she was better for having had her sorrow
out, for having spoken of it. He was sorry to leave her in such a state of
mind, but he was in haste. He had a great many things to do still.

“To Lise.”

“Oh, yes. You won’t forget, you won’t forget what I asked
you? It’s a question of life and death!”

“Of course, I won’t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,”
muttered Alyosha, beating a hasty retreat.

“No, be sure, be sure to come in; don’t say ‘If you
can.’ I shall die if you don’t,” Madame Hohlakov called after
him, but Alyosha had already left the room.

“But I do love you!” answered Alyosha warmly.

“And will you weep over me, will you?”

“Yes.”

“Not because I won’t be your wife, but simply weep for me?”

“Yes.”

“Thank you! It’s only your tears I want. Every one else may punish
me and trample me under foot, every one, every one, not excepting any
one . For I don’t love any one. Do you hear, not any one! On the
contrary, I hate him! Go, Alyosha; it’s time you went to your
brother”; she tore herself away from him suddenly.

“How can I leave you like this?” said Alyosha, almost in alarm.

“Go to your brother, the prison will be shut; go, here’s your hat.
Give my love to Mitya, go, go!”

And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door. He looked at her with
pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his right hand, a
tiny letter folded up tight and sealed. He glanced at it and instantly read the
address, “To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.” He looked quickly at
Lise. Her face had become almost menacing.

“Give it to him, you must give it to him!” she ordered him,
trembling and beside herself. “To‐day, at once, or I’ll poison
myself! That’s why I sent for you.”

And she slammed the door quickly. The bolt clicked. Alyosha put the note in his
pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to Madame Hohlakov;
forgetting her, in fact. As soon as Alyosha had gone, Lise unbolted the door,
opened it a little, put her finger in the crack and slammed the door with all
her might, pinching her finger. Ten seconds after, releasing her finger, she
walked softly, slowly to her chair, sat up straight in it and looked intently
at her blackened finger and at the blood that oozed from under the nail. Her
lips were quivering and she kept whispering rapidly to herself:

“I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!”

He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell, when he suddenly
stopped. He felt that he was trembling all over with anger. Suddenly he let go
of the bell, turned back with a curse, and walked with rapid steps in the
opposite direction. He walked a mile and a half to a tiny, slanting, wooden
house, almost a hut, where Marya Kondratyevna, the neighbor who used to come to
Fyodor Pavlovitch’s kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung
his songs and played on the guitar, was now lodging. She had sold their little
house, and was now living here with her mother. Smerdyakov, who was
ill—almost dying—had been with them ever since Fyodor
Pavlovitch’s death. It was to him Ivan was going now, drawn by a sudden
and irresistible prompting.

Just as he reached his own house he stopped short, asking himself suddenly
hadn’t he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything. He
decided the question by turning back to the house. “Everything together
to‐morrow!” he whispered to himself, and, strange to say, almost all his
gladness and self‐satisfaction passed in one instant.

As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on his heart,
like a recollection or, more exactly, a reminder, of something agonizing and
revolting that was in that room now, at that moment, and had been there before.
He sank wearily on his sofa. The old woman brought him a samovar; he made tea,
but did not touch it. He sat on the sofa and felt giddy. He felt that he was
ill and helpless. He was beginning to drop asleep, but got up uneasily and
walked across the room to shake off his drowsiness. At moments he fancied he
was delirious, but it was not illness that he thought of most. Sitting down
again, he began looking round, as though searching for something. This happened
several times. At last his eyes were fastened intently on one point. Ivan
smiled, but an angry flush suffused his face. He sat a long time in his place,
his head propped on both arms, though he looked sideways at the same point, at
the sofa that stood against the opposite wall. There was evidently something,
some object, that irritated him there, worried him and tormented him.

A loud, persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window. Ivan jumped up
from the sofa.

“Do you hear? You’d better open,” cried the visitor;
“it’s your brother Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising
news, I’ll be bound!”

“Be silent, deceiver, I knew it was Alyosha, I felt he was coming, and of
course he has not come for nothing; of course he brings ‘news,’
” Ivan exclaimed frantically.

“Open, open to him. There’s a snowstorm and he is your brother. Monsieur sait‐il le temps qu’il fait? C’est à ne pas mettre un
chien dehors .”

The knocking continued. Ivan wanted to rush to the window, but something seemed
to fetter his arms and legs. He strained every effort to break his chains, but
in vain. The knocking at the window grew louder and louder. At last the chains
were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa. He looked round him wildly. Both
candles had almost burnt out, the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood
before him on the table, and there was no one on the sofa opposite. The
knocking on the window frame went on persistently, but it was by no means so
loud as it had seemed in his dream; on the contrary, it was quite subdued.

“It was not a dream! No, I swear it was not a dream, it all happened just
now!” cried Ivan. He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane.

“Alyosha, I told you not to come,” he cried fiercely to his
brother. “In two words, what do you want? In two words, do you
hear?”

“An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself,” Alyosha answered from the
yard.

“Come round to the steps, I’ll open at once,” said Ivan,
going to open the door to Alyosha.

He jumped up in a frenzy, flung off the towel, and fell to pacing up and down
the room again. Alyosha recalled what he had just said. “I seem to be
sleeping awake.... I walk, I speak, I see, but I am asleep.” It seemed to
be just like that now. Alyosha did not leave him. The thought passed through
his mind to run for a doctor, but he was afraid to leave his brother alone:
there was no one to whom he could leave him. By degrees Ivan lost consciousness
completely at last. He still went on talking, talking incessantly, but quite
incoherently, and even articulated his words with difficulty. Suddenly he
staggered violently; but Alyosha was in time to support him. Ivan let him lead
him to his bed. Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed. He sat
watching over him for another two hours. The sick man slept soundly, without
stirring, breathing softly and evenly. Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on
the sofa, without undressing.

As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan. He began to understand
Ivan’s illness. “The anguish of a proud determination. An earnest
conscience!” God, in Whom he disbelieved, and His truth were gaining
mastery over his heart, which still refused to submit. “Yes,” the
thought floated through Alyosha’s head as it lay on the pillow,
“yes, if Smerdyakov is dead, no one will believe Ivan’s evidence;
but he will go and give it.” Alyosha smiled softly. “God will
conquer!” he thought. “He will either rise up in the light of
truth, or ... he’ll perish in hate, revenging on himself and on every one
his having served the cause he does not believe in,” Alyosha added
bitterly, and again he prayed for Ivan.

Book XII. A Judicial Error

“I won’t again, I won’t. It escaped me. I won’t do it
again.”

And, of course, this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the public.
His character was displayed, and it spoke for itself. It was under the
influence of this incident that the opening statement was read. It was rather
short, but circumstantial. It only stated the chief reasons why he had been
arrested, why he must be tried, and so on. Yet it made a great impression on
me. The clerk read it loudly and distinctly. The whole tragedy was suddenly
unfolded before us, concentrated, in bold relief, in a fatal and pitiless
light. I remember how, immediately after it had been read, the President asked
Mitya in a loud impressive voice:

“Prisoner, do you plead guilty?”

Mitya suddenly rose from his seat.

“I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation,” he exclaimed,
again in a startling, almost frenzied, voice, “to idleness and
debauchery. I meant to become an honest man for good, just at the moment when I
was struck down by fate. But I am not guilty of the death of that old man, my
enemy and my father. No, no, I am not guilty of robbing him! I could not be.
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel, but not a thief.”

He sat down again, visibly trembling all over. The President again briefly, but
impressively, admonished him to answer only what was asked, and not to go off
into irrelevant exclamations. Then he ordered the case to proceed. All the
witnesses were led up to take the oath. Then I saw them all together. The
brothers of the prisoner were, however, allowed to give evidence without taking
the oath. After an exhortation from the priest and the President, the witnesses
were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another.
Then they began calling them up one by one.

The same thing happened with the Poles. They took up an attitude of pride and
independence; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the service of
the Crown, and that “Pan Mitya” had offered them three thousand
“to buy their honor,” and that they had seen a large sum of money
in his hands. Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words
into his sentences, and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the
eyes of the President and the prosecutor, grew more and more pompous, and ended
by talking in Polish altogether. But Fetyukovitch caught them, too, in his
snares. Trifon Borissovitch, recalled, was forced, in spite of his evasions, to
admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he
had provided, and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game. Kalganov
confirmed this, and both the Poles left the witness‐box with damaged
reputations, amidst laughter from the public.

Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous
witnesses. Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them, and
dismissing them with a certain derision. The lawyers and experts were lost in
admiration, and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose could be
served by it, for all, I repeat, felt that the case for the prosecution could
not be refuted, but was growing more and more tragically overwhelming. But from
the confidence of the “great magician” they saw that he was serene,
and they waited, feeling that “such a man” had not come from
Petersburg for nothing, and that he was not a man to return unsuccessful.

“And I am weeping now, German, I am weeping now, too, you saintly
man,” Mitya cried suddenly.

In any case the anecdote made a certain favorable impression on the public. But
the chief sensation in Mitya’s favor was created by the evidence of
Katerina Ivanovna, which I will describe directly. Indeed, when the witnesses à décharge , that is, called by the defense, began giving evidence,
fortune seemed all at once markedly more favorable to Mitya, and what was
particularly striking, this was a surprise even to the counsel for the defense.
But before Katerina Ivanovna was called, Alyosha was examined, and he recalled
a fact which seemed to furnish positive evidence against one important point
made by the prosecution.

Fetyukovitch began his cross‐examination. I remember that among other things he
asked about Rakitin and the twenty‐five roubles “you paid him for
bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you.”

“There was nothing strange about his taking the money,” sneered
Grushenka, with angry contempt. “He was always coming to me for money: he
used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me, chiefly for luxuries: he
had enough to keep him without my help.”

“What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin?” Fetyukovitch asked,
in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President.

“Why, he is my cousin. His mother was my mother’s sister. But
he’s always besought me not to tell any one here of it, he is so
dreadfully ashamed of me.”

This fact was a complete surprise to every one; no one in the town nor in the
monastery, not even Mitya, knew of it. I was told that Rakitin turned purple
with shame where he sat. Grushenka had somehow heard before she came into the
court that he had given evidence against Mitya, and so she was angry. The whole
effect on the public, of Rakitin’s speech, of his noble sentiments, of
his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder of Russia, was this time
finally ruined. Fetyukovitch was satisfied: it was another godsend.
Grushenka’s cross‐examination did not last long and, of course, there
could be nothing particularly new in her evidence. She left a very disagreeable
impression on the public; hundreds of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her, as
she finished giving her evidence and sat down again in the court, at a good
distance from Katerina Ivanovna. Mitya was silent throughout her evidence. He
sat as though turned to stone, with his eyes fixed on the ground.

Ivan was called to give evidence.

“At the first temptation—for instance, to entertain the woman with
whom he had already squandered half the money—he would have unpicked his
little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles, for why should he have
taken back precisely half the money, that is, fifteen hundred roubles? why not
fourteen hundred? He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief,
because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles. Then another time he would
have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred, and then a third, and
then a fourth, and before the end of the month he would have taken the last
note but one, feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the
purpose, for a thief would have stolen it all. And then he would have looked at
this last note, and have said to himself, ‘It’s really not worth
while to give back one hundred; let’s spend that, too!’
That’s how the real Dmitri Karamazov, as we know him, would have behaved.
One cannot imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this
legend of the little bag. Nothing could be more inconceivable. But we shall
return to that later.”

After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the
financial relations of father and son, and arguing again and again that it was
utterly impossible, from the facts known, to determine which was in the wrong,
Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical experts in reference
to Mitya’s fixed idea about the three thousand owing him.

“Yes, what will Fetyukovitch say?”

“Whatever he says, he won’t get round our peasants.”

“Don’t you think so?”

A fourth group:

“What he said about the troika was good, that piece about the other
nations.”

“And that was true what he said about other nations not standing
it.”

“What do you mean?”

“Why, in the English Parliament a Member got up last week and speaking
about the Nihilists asked the Ministry whether it was not high time to
intervene, to educate this barbarous people. Ippolit was thinking of him, I
know he was. He was talking about that last week.”

“Not an easy job.”

“Not an easy job? Why not?”

“Why, we’d shut up Kronstadt and not let them have any corn. Where
would they get it?”

“In America. They get it from America now.”

“Nonsense!”

But the bell rang, all rushed to their places. Fetyukovitch mounted the
tribune.

“Again, though he ran to see whether the witness was alive, he left
another witness on the path, that brass pestle which he had taken from the two
women, and which they could always recognize afterwards as theirs, and prove
that he had taken it from them. And it is not as though he had forgotten it on
the path, dropped it through carelessness or haste, no, he had flung away his
weapon, for it was found fifteen paces from where Grigory lay. Why did he do
so? Just because he was grieved at having killed a man, an old servant; and he
flung away the pestle with a curse, as a murderous weapon. That’s how it
must have been, what other reason could he have had for throwing it so far? And
if he was capable of feeling grief and pity at having killed a man, it shows
that he was innocent of his father’s murder. Had he murdered him, he
would never have run to another victim out of pity; then he would have felt
differently; his thoughts would have been centered on self‐preservation. He
would have had none to spare for pity, that is beyond doubt. On the contrary,
he would have broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after
him. There was room for pity and good‐feeling just because his conscience had
been clear till then. Here we have a different psychology. I have purposely
resorted to this method, gentlemen of the jury, to show that you can prove
anything by it. It all depends on who makes use of it. Psychology lures even
most serious people into romancing, and quite unconsciously. I am speaking of
the abuse of psychology, gentlemen.”

Sounds of approval and laughter, at the expense of the prosecutor, were again
audible in the court. I will not repeat the speech in detail; I will only quote
some passages from it, some leading points.

“But in the first place, it’s the letter of a drunken man and
written in great irritation; secondly, he writes of the envelope from what he
has heard from Smerdyakov again, for he has not seen the envelope himself; and
thirdly, he wrote it indeed, but how can you prove that he did it? Did the
prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow, did he find the money, did
that money exist indeed? And was it to get money that the prisoner ran off, if
you remember? He ran off post‐haste not to steal, but to find out where she
was, the woman who had crushed him. He was not running to carry out a program,
to carry out what he had written, that is, not for an act of premeditated
robbery, but he ran suddenly, spontaneously, in a jealous fury. Yes! I shall be
told, but when he got there and murdered him he seized the money, too. But did
he murder him after all? The charge of robbery I repudiate with indignation. A
man cannot be accused of robbery, if it’s impossible to state accurately
what he has stolen; that’s an axiom. But did he murder him without
robbery, did he murder him at all? Is that proved? Isn’t that, too, a
romance?”

At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause. The last
words, indeed, were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that every one
felt that he really might have something to say, and that what he was about to
say would be of the greatest consequence. But the President, hearing the
applause, in a loud voice threatened to clear the court if such an incident
were repeated. Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitch began in a voice full of
feeling quite unlike the tone he had used hitherto.

“I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my
father’s blood! Katya, I forgive you! Brothers, friends, have pity on the
other woman!”

He could not go on, and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all
over the court in a strange, unnatural voice unlike his own. From the farthest
corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek—it was
Grushenka. She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before
the beginning of the lawyers’ speeches. Mitya was taken away. The passing
of the sentence was deferred till next day. The whole court was in a hubbub but
I did not wait to hear. I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps
as I went out.

“He’ll have a twenty years’ trip to the mines!”

“Not less.”

“Well, our peasants have stood firm.”

“And have done for our Mitya.”

EPILOGUE

“I ought to ... but I cannot....” Katya moaned. “He will look
at me.... I can’t.”

“Your eyes ought to meet. How will you live all your life, if you
don’t make up your mind to do it now?”

“Better suffer all my life.”

“You ought to go, you ought to go,” Alyosha repeated with merciless
emphasis.

“But why to‐day, why at once?... I can’t leave our
patient—”

“You can for a moment. It will only be a moment. If you don’t come,
he will be in delirium by to‐night. I would not tell you a lie; have pity on
him!”

“Have pity on me! ” Katya said, with bitter reproach, and she
burst into tears.

“Then you will come,” said Alyosha firmly, seeing her tears.
“I’ll go and tell him you will come directly.”

“No, don’t tell him so on any account,” cried Katya in alarm.
“I will come, but don’t tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go,
but not go in.... I don’t know yet—”

Her voice failed her. She gasped for breath. Alyosha got up to go.

“And what if I meet any one?” she said suddenly, in a low voice,
turning white again.

“That’s just why you must go now, to avoid meeting any one. There
will be no one there, I can tell you that for certain. We will expect
you,” he concluded emphatically, and went out of the room.

“Alyosha, run after her!” Mitya cried to his brother; “tell
her ... I don’t know ... don’t let her go away like this!”

“I’ll come to you again at nightfall,” said Alyosha, and he
ran after Katya. He overtook her outside the hospital grounds. She was walking
fast, but as soon as Alyosha caught her up she said quickly:

“No, before that woman I can’t punish myself! I asked her
forgiveness because I wanted to punish myself to the bitter end. She would not
forgive me.... I like her for that!” she added, in an unnatural voice,
and her eyes flashed with fierce resentment.

“My brother did not expect this in the least,” muttered Alyosha.
“He was sure she would not come—”

“No doubt. Let us leave that,” she snapped. “Listen: I
can’t go with you to the funeral now. I’ve sent them flowers. I
think they still have money. If necessary, tell them I’ll never abandon
them.... Now leave me, leave me, please. You are late as it is—the bells
are ringing for the service.... Leave me, please!”

“We will remember, we will remember,” cried the boys. “He was
brave, he was good!”

“Ah, how I loved him!” exclaimed Kolya.

“Ah, children, ah, dear friends, don’t be afraid of life! How good
life is when one does something good and just!”

“Yes, yes,” the boys repeated enthusiastically.

“Karamazov, we love you!” a voice, probably Kartashov’s,
cried impulsively.

“We love you, we love you!” they all caught it up. There were tears
in the eyes of many of them.

“Hurrah for Karamazov!” Kolya shouted ecstatically.

“And may the dead boy’s memory live for ever!” Alyosha added
again with feeling.

“For ever!” the boys chimed in again.

“Karamazov,” cried Kolya, “can it be true what’s taught
us in religion, that we shall all rise again from the dead and shall live and
see each other again, all, Ilusha too?”

“Certainly we shall all rise again, certainly we shall see each other and
shall tell each other with joy and gladness all that has happened!”
Alyosha answered, half laughing, half enthusiastic.

“Ah, how splendid it will be!” broke from Kolya.

“Well, now we will finish talking and go to his funeral dinner.
Don’t be put out at our eating pancakes—it’s a very old
custom and there’s something nice in that!” laughed Alyosha.
“Well, let us go! And now we go hand in hand.”

“And always so, all our lives hand in hand! Hurrah for Karamazov!”
Kolya cried once more rapturously, and once more the boys took up his
exclamation: “Hurrah for Karamazov!”

THE END

FOOTNOTES

[1] In Russian, “silen.”

[2] A proverbial expression in Russia.

[3] Grushenka.

[4] i.e. setter dog.

[5] Probably the public event was the Decabrist plot against the Tsar, of
December 1825, in which the most distinguished men in Russia were
concerned.—T RANSLATOR’S N OTE .

[6] When a monk’s body is carried out from the cell to the church and from
the church to the graveyard, the canticle “What earthly joy...” is
sung. If the deceased was a priest as well as a monk the canticle “Our
Helper and Defender” is sung instead.

[7] i.e. a chime of bells.

[8] Literally: “Did you get off with a long nose made at
you?”—a proverbial expression in Russia for failure.

[9] Gogol is meant.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org .

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

